GTN for GC-MS processing with metaMS on Galaxy (#1731)
galaxyproject/training-material: topics/metabolomics/tutorials/gcms/tutorial.md

--- 
layout : tutorial_hands_on

> enable: false

Reviewer: It is still hidden @melpetera

Reviewer 2: Yes, it is meant to be. We needed it to be available this way as a first step. This will allow the material to be tested by colleagues that are not familiar with the GTN contribution system. This way we can have feedback on the content, see what is missing/unclear etc. and enhance the material for it to be a ressource that can be useful for anybody. 
The difficulty for "user reviewers" to access the PR content was, I guess, one reason why this training material was left pending for so long.

--- 
layout : tutorial_hands_on

> 

Reviewer 2: I would suggest for now to add that for now.

```suggestion
enable: false

```

--- 
layout : tutorial_hands_on
enable: false

title : 'Mass spectrometry : GC-MS analysis with metaMS package'
level : Introductory
zenodo_link : 'https://zenodo.org/record/3244991' 
questions : 
    - What are the main steps of GC-MS datas processing for metabolomic analysis ? 
    - How te be able to annotate the maximum of unknowns using Galaxy ? 
objectives : 
    - To be sure you have already comprehend the diversity of MS pre-processing analysis. 
    - To learn the principal functions of metaMS package through Galaxy.
    - To evaluate the potential of this new GC-MS workflow for GC-MS metabolomic analysis. 
time_estimation : 2H 
key_points : 
    - Have a good file containing all your peaks during the first stopover 
    - Find all your unknowns in your datas
    - Find your stanards if you have some 
requirements :
  - type: "internal"
    topic_name: metabolomics
    tutorials: 
      - lcms
contributors : 
    - jsaintvanne

--- 

# Introduction
{:.no_toc}

> A lot of packages are available for the analysis of GC-MS or LC-MS datas. Typically, hardware vendors provide software that is optimized for the instrument and allow a direct interaction of the lab scientist with the data. Some other open-source alternatives such as **XCMS** are also able to be integrated easily in web interfaces, allowing large numbers of files to be processed simultaneously. Because of the generality of packages like **XCMS**, several other packages have been developped to use the functionality of **XCMS** for optimal performance in a particular context. Package **metaMS** does so for the field of untargeted metabolomics, focuses on the GC-MS analysis during this tutorial. One of the goals **metaMS** was to set up a simple system with few user-settable parameters, capable of handling the vast majority of untargeted metabolomics experiments. During this tutorial, we will learn how to process easily a test dataset from raw files to the annotation using W4M Galaxy. Datas are from {% cite Dittami2012 %} and have been used as test dataset for the development of the Galaxy wrappers. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A lot of packages are available for the analysis of GC-MS or LC-MS data. Typically, hardware vendors provide software that is optimized for the instrument and allow a direct interaction of the lab scientist with the data. Some other open-source alternatives such as **XCMS** are also able to be integrated easily in web interfaces, allowing large numbers of files to be processed simultaneously. Because of the generality of packages like **XCMS**, several other packages have been developed to use the functionality of **XCMS** for optimal performance in a particular context. Package **metaMS** does so for the field of untargeted metabolomics, focuses on the GC-MS analysis during this tutorial. One of the goals **metaMS** was to set up a simple system with few user-settable parameters, capable of handling the vast majority of untargeted metabolomics experiments. 

During this tutorial, we will learn how to process easily a test dataset from raw files to the annotation using W4M Galaxy. Datas are from {% cite Dittami2012 %} and have been used as test dataset for the development of the Galaxy wrappers. 
```

> ### Agenda
>
> In this tutorial, we will cover:
>
> 1. TOC
> {:toc}
>
{: .agenda}

# pre-processing with XCMS

The first step of the workflow is the pre-processing of the raw data with **XCMS** ({% cite Smith2006 %}).
{: .text-justify}

> **XCMS** is a free and open source software dedicated to pre-processing of any type of mass spectrometry acquisition files from low to high resolution, including FT-MS data coupled with different kind of chromatography (liquid or gas). This software is used worldwide by a huge community of specialists in metabolomics using mass spectrometry methods.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**XCMS** {% icon tool %} is a free and open-source software dedicated to pre-processing any type of mass spectrometry acquisition files from low to high resolution, including FT-MS data coupled with different kind of chromatography (liquid or gas). This software is used worldwide by a huge community of specialists in metabolomics.
```

> {: .solution}
>
> > ### {% icon solution %} 7 - (Optionnal) XCMS step : *integrating areas of missing peaks*
> >
> > This last step can be run after grouping your peaks and don't need the retention time correction. It is not an obligation to process it but when you have low peaks it can be helpfull to obtain something around them. Run **xcms fillChromPeaks (fillPeaks)** {% icon tool%} to identify, for each sample, peak groups where that sample is not represented. 
> >  - **Input** : 
> >    - your Rdata file `xset.merged.groupChromPeaks.*.RData`
> >  - **Output** : 
> >    - a new RData file named `xset.merged.groupChromPeaks.*.fillChromPeaks.RData`
> {: .solution}
> > ### {% icon comment %} Important : Be careful of the file format
> >
> > During each step of pre-processing, your file has its format changed and can have also its name changed.
> > To be able to continue to MSMS processing, you need to have a RData object wich is **merged and grouped** (step 4 and 5) at least. It means that you should have a file named `xset.merged.groupChromPeaks.RData` (and maybe with some step more in it).
> {: .warning} 
{: .details}

> 

Reviewer: Since this section can be considered as undertaken in the  [Mass spectrometry: LC-MS preprocessing with XCMS training](https://training.galaxyproject.org/training-material/topics/metabolomics/tutorials/lcms-preprocessing/tutorial.html), I suggest recommending the users to start with the previous training and skip this part; in my opinion, it would be better to provide the required datasets (generated in the previous training) as Zenodo links, and start the training by the **Verify your data after the XCMS pre-processing**.

Reviewer 3: Hi @gallardoalba , Many many thanks for the work. You're right it will be simpler this way.

Reviewer 2: Thank you a lot @gallardoalba for this very complete review!
Concerning this specific comment, indeed it may be partly redundant with the "Mass spectrometry: LC-MS preprocessing with XCMS" training,, and thus simplification is a good suggestion. 
I checked in more details what would be needed to replace this part, and it appears that simply providing the required data may not be satisfactory: in fact the dataset used in the two tutorials are different and due to the way the specific RData file used are handled in modules, it would imply to provide anyway the starting files from the XCMS file anyway. 
Thus, I would suggest to keep a "hands-on" about the required XCMS steps but in a "lighter" format. By this, I mean inviting the trainee to follow the first step of the LC-MS tutorial to get familiar with the steps and parameters, and then providing a hands-on to run the needed steps on the GC-MS dataset but only containing the parameters to run with no additional explanation, considering the explanations are given in the LC-MS training. 
Would this seems good?
If it is alright, I can propose something for this part, if it is also ok for you @yguitton, I have some ideas.

Reviewer 3: @melpetera Ok for me

Reviewer: Also for me :)

Reviewer 2: Done in 7da7eca :)
I chose not to put the hands-on as only one block to help trainees in grasping the main steps. Thus I put the "1- / 2- / 3-" main parts as sections / sub-sections to make it simplier. 
The jobs are the same without the redundant explainations. 
This ok?

Reviewer: Looks fine for me.

> {: .text-justify}
> 
> > ### {% icon tip %} Tip: Copy dataset to a new history
> >
> > 1. Click on the {% icon galaxy-gear %} icon (**History options**) on the top of the history panel
> > 2. Click on **Copy Dataset**
> > 3. Select the desired files
> > 4. Give a relevant name to the "New history"
> > 5. Click on the new history name in the green box that have just appear to switch to this history
> {: .tip}
> 
> To begin a new history with the files from your current history, you can **use the functionality ‘copy dataset’** and copy it into a new history (the option is hidden behind the notched wheel at the top right of the history).
> {: .text-justify}
> 
> You may have notice that the XCMS tools generate **output names that contain the different XCMS steps you used**, allowing easy traceability while browsing your history. Hence, we highly recommend you to rename it **with something short**, e.g. "xset", "XCMSSetObject", or anything not too long that you may find convenient.
> {: .text-justify}

> > {% include snippets/rename_dataset.md %}

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> {% snippet faqs/galaxy/datasets_rename.md %}
```
This PR is quite old, I think the snippet system changed.

> >  - XCMS integration of missing peaks with **xcms fillChromPeaks (fillPeaks)** {% icon tool %} tool
> > 
> {: .solution}
> <br>
>  **2** - Concerning what we said before and the previous answer, what is the complete name of your final RData file ?
> > ### {% icon solution %} Solution
> > 
> > During each step of XCMS pre-processing, the name of the file which is processing is completed by the name of the step you were doing. So, finally your file should be name `xset.merged.groupChromPeaks.fillChromPeaks.RData`. That because (as seen in previous answer) you ran a grouping and the integration after merged datas.
> > {: .text-justify}
> > 
> {: .solution}
> <br>
> **3** - What is the size (in MB) of your final RData file ?
> > ### {% icon solution %} Solution
> > 
> > To be able to see the size of a file in your history, you just have to select it. It will deploy informations about it and you can see the size of yours. For our example, the size of the final file is **1.4 MB**.
> > {: .text-justify}
> > 
> {: .solution}
{: .question}

# Processing with metaMS part

> **metaMS** is a R package for MS-based metabolomics data. It can does basic peak picking and grouping using functions from **XCMS** and **CAMERA** packages. The main output of **metaMS** is a table of feature intensities in all samples which can be analysed with multivariate methods immediately. The package also offers the possibility to create in-house databases of mass spectra (including retention information) of pure chemical compounds. These databases can then be used for annotation purposes. The most important functions of this package are *runGC* and *runLC* (and each one to create databases *createSTDdbGC* and *createSTDdbLC*).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**metaMS** is a R package for MS-based metabolomics data. It can do basic peak picking and grouping using functions from **XCMS** and **CAMERA** packages. The main output of **metaMS** is a table of feature intensities in all samples which can be analyzed with multivariate methods immediately. The package also offers the possibility to create in-house databases of mass spectra (including retention information) of pure chemical compounds. These databases can then be used for annotation purposes. The most important functions of this package are *runGC* and *runLC* (and each one to create databases *createSTDdbGC* and *createSTDdbLC*).
```

{: .text-justify}
During this tutorial we are interested in GC-MS analysis, so we will use the *runGC* function of **metaMS** and described it in details to be able to understand this function. The standard workflow of **metaMS** for GC-MS data is the following : 

> ![Workflow metaMS](../../images/tuto_gcms_workflow_metaMS.png "Workflow of metaMS for GC datas")

Reviewer: I would try to improve the quality of this scheme.

> The *runGC* function is implemented in **metaMS.runGC {% icon tool %} tool** in W4M Galaxy. It takes a vector of file names, corresponding to the samples, and a settings list as mandatory arguments. In addition, some extra arguments can be provided. In particular, a database of standards, as discussed later in tutorial, can be provided for annotation purposes. This tool regroups all these steps that are described in the following parts to be able to understand all its functionnalities and particularities. We will run the tool after we understand each of its steps because it is important to know what are the best parameters for our datas and why each parameter is done. 
> {: .text-justify}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The *runGC* function is implemented in **metaMS.runGC {% icon tool %} tool** in W4M Galaxy. It takes a vector of file names, corresponding to the samples, and a settings list as mandatory arguments. In addition, some extra arguments can be provided. In particular, a database of standards, as discussed later in the tutorial, can be provided for annotation purposes. This tool regroups all these steps that are described in the following parts to be able to understand all its functionalities and particularities. We will run the tool after we understand each of its steps because it is important to know what are the best parameters for our data and why each parameter is done. 
{: .text-justify}
```

## Peak picking

The peak picking is performed by the usual **XCMS** functions. A function has been written in **metaMS** to allow the individual parameters to be passed to the function as a settings list. The result is that the whole of the **XCMS** functionality is available, simply by changing the values of some settings, or by adding fields. 
 {: .text-justify}

> Whereas the package is not up-to-date since the new version of **XCMS** (3.x). This new version brought a lot of new object and transformed the peak picking processus. To have the last version of this processus, **metaMS** authorized **to start its function directly with the file containing all peak picking results**. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Whereas the package is not up-to-date since the new version of **XCMS** (3.x). This new version brought a lot of new objects and transformed the peak picking process. To have the last version of this process, **metaMS** authorized **to start its function directly with the file containing all peak picking results**. 
```

{: .text-justify}

## Unknowns research

> The most important aspect of untargeted metabolomics is the definition of unknowns, patterns that occur repeatedly in several samples, but for which no annotation has been found. In **metaMS** these unknowns are found by comparing all patterns within a certain retention time (or retention index) difference on their spectral characteristics. The same match function is used, but the threshold may be different from the threshold used to match with the database of standards. Likewise, the maximum retention time(index)difference may be different, too. In defining unknowns we have so far used settings that are more strict than when comparing to a database : since all samples are typically measured in one single run, expected retention time differences are rather small. In addition, one would expect reproducible spectra for a single compound. A true unknown, or at least an interesting one, is also present in a significant fraction of the samples. All these parameters are gathered in thebetweenSampleselement of the settingsobject.Since the matching is done using scaled patterns, we need to created a scaled version of the experimental pseudo-spectra first.
> {: .text-justify}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The most important aspect of untargeted metabolomics is the definition of unknowns, patterns that occur repeatedly in several samples, but for which no annotation has been found. In **metaMS** these unknowns are found by comparing all patterns within a certain retention time (or retention index) difference on their spectral characteristics. The same match function is used, but the threshold may be different from the threshold used to match with the database of standards. Likewise, the maximum retention time(index)difference may be different, too. 

In defining unknowns we have so far used settings that are more strict than when compared to a database : since all samples are typically measured in one single run, expected retention time differences are rather small. In addition, one would expect reproducible spectra for a single compound. A true unknown, or at least an interesting one, is also present in a significant fraction of the samples. All these parameters are gathered in thebetweenSampleselement of the settingsobject .Since the matching is done using scaled patterns, we need to create a scaled version of the experimental pseudo-spectra first.
{: .text-justify}
```

{: .text-justify}

## Outputs and results

At this stage, all elements are complete : we have the list of pseudo-spectra with an annotation, either as a chemical standard from the database, or an unknown occurring in a sizeable fraction of the injections. The only things left to do is to calculate relative intensities for the pseudo-spectra, and to put the results in an easy-to-use table. This table consists of two parts. The first part is the information on the “features”, which here are the pseudo-spectra. The second part of the table contains the intensities of these features in the individual injections. 
{: .text-justify}

![Match spectra](../../images/tuto_gcms_finale_table.png "Final table with unknowns and compounds found during **metaMS** processus")

> The first five lines are the standards, and the next ones are the unknowns that are identified by the  pipeline.  
> In manual interpretation of this kind of data, the intensities of one or two “highly specific” features are often used to achieve relative quantitation. In an automatic pipeline, this is a risky strategy : not only can the intensity of a peak vary quite dramatically (relative standard deviations of up to 30% are assumed acceptable in GC-MS, e.g.  when SPME is applied), but these errors are all the more pronounced in high-intensity peaks (hence the common use of a relative standard deviation).
> In addition, one is ignoring the information in the other peaks of the pseudospectrum. In **metaMS**, pseudospectrum intensity is expressed as a multiple of the corresponding reference pattern (either a database pattern or an unknown), where the intensity ratio is determined using robust regression to avoid one deviating feature to influence the results too much ({% cite Wehrens2014 %}). First, we define an object containing all relevant pseudo-spectra, and next the intensities are generated.
> {: .text-justify}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The first five lines are the standards, and the next ones are the unknowns that are identified by the pipeline.  In the manual interpretation of this kind of data, the intensities of one or two “highly specific” features are often used to achieve relative quantitation. In an automatic pipeline, this is a risky strategy: not only can the intensity of a peak vary quite dramatically (relative standard deviations of up to 30% are assumed acceptable in GC-MS, e.g. when SPME is applied), but these errors are all the more pronounced in high-intensity peaks (hence the common use of a relative standard deviation).

In addition, one is ignoring the information in the other peaks of the pseudospectrum. In **metaMS**, pseudospectrum intensity is expressed as a multiple of the corresponding reference pattern (either a database pattern or an unknown), where the intensity ratio is determined using robust regression to avoid one deviating feature to influence the results too much ({% cite Wehrens2014 %}). First, we define an object containing all relevant pseudo-spectra, and next the intensities are generated.
{: .text-justify}
```

In both cases, the result is a list containing a set of patterns corresponding with the compounds that have been found, either annotated or unknown, the relative intensities of these patterns in the individual annotations, and possibly the xcmsSetobject for further inspection. In practice, the *runGC* function is all that users need to use.
{: .text-justify}

> That file can be used for database search online (Golm, MassBank) or locally (NIST MSSEARCH) for NIST search a tutorial is available here.

Reviewer: I would include references to those databases.

Reviewer 2: @yguitton gave me the references and I added it in 34dd2ce
Is this ok?

Reviewer: Sure, thanks!

>   - **Use Personnal DataBase option** : you can compare your datas to a personnal database. If you want to do it start to choose `show` in this parameter. Then you will be able to select your file. If not, keep it to `hide` and you will only have unknowns as results.
>     - **DB file** : this parameter will appear if you choose to show it. You just have to `select your database in your file` to add this here. Be careful, this database has to respect some rules (please look at *?????????????????? part*).
>   - **Use RI option** : choose if you want to use the RI for standards.
>     - **RI file** : enter here `your RI file` which have to contains two columns : retention time and retention indices. 
>   - **Use RI as filter** : just to know if you want to use RI parameter as a filter.
>     - **RIshift** : if you want to use RI as filter, please precise here the RI shift. For our tutorial `keep the previous parameter to FALSE`. 
>
>
{: .hands_on}

# Take a look at your results after metaMS processing

> We choose to separate our first W4M Galaxy tool into 2 parts : the processing of GC-MS datas (**metaMS.runGC {% icon tool %}**) and the plotting results of these datas (**metaMS.plot {% icon tool %}**). So we now have the first part describes just before and the second part we will describe just after. This part allows users to see their TIC (Total Ion Chromatogram), BPC (Base Peak Chromatogram) and also all EICs (Extracted Ion Chromatogram) you want, from our previous result outputted from **metaMS.runGC {% icon tool %} tool**. 
> {: .text-justify}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We choose to separate our first W4M Galaxy tool into 2 parts: the processing of GC-MS data (**metaMS.runGC {% icon tool %}**) and the plotting results of these data (**metaMS.plot {% icon tool %}**). So we now have the first part describes just before and the second part we will describe just after. This part allows users to see the TIC (Total Ion Chromatogram), BPC (Base Peak Chromatogram), and also all EICs (Extracted Ion Chromatogram) you want, from our previous result outputted from **metaMS.runGC {% icon tool %} tool**. 
{: .text-justify}
```
